Section 4
 
Data - is a collection of facts such as numbers, words, measurmets, observations or just descriptions 
of things.
Raw data- raw input of text, numbers and symbols that need to be  processed to give it meaning.
Information - processed data which has meaning
Data, in context of databases - refers to all the single items that are stored in a database, either 
indovodually or as a set.

What is a DataBase
it is an organized collection of structured information, or data typically stored electronically in 
a computer system.

Difference between a databese and spreadsheet
A spreadsheet is designed for one user, its greate for a single user or a small number of users who do not 
need to do a lot of incredibly complicated data manipulation.
Databases, are designed to hold much larger collection of organized information.

How is data stored 
Data is stored inside a database, data is stored into tables(tables are made up of columns and rows)

Columns define the data in a table (field=column)
Field is also the intersection of a row and a column

Row is a collection of fields that make up a record
Row is also called a record 

What is a key?
A key is a data item that exclusively identifies a record.
Keys are also used to generate relationships among different database tables.

Different types of keys
Candidate Key- is am attribute or set of attributes that uniquely identifies a record.
Tables can have multiple candidate keys. 
Among the set of candidate keys, one candidate key is chosen as a primary key.

Primary Key 
Is a set of one or more fields(columns)of a table that uniquely identify a record in a database table.
A table can have only one primary key and one candidate key can select as a primary key.
The primary key should be chosen such that is attributes as never or rerely changed.
Cannot be null
Has a clustered index

Secondary Key
Candidate key that are not selected as primary key
Also called a Alternate key

Unique Key 
A unique key is a set of one or more attribute that can be used to identify the records in a table
cantains a non-clusterd index

Composite Key
is a combination of more than one attributes that can be used to uniquely identify each record

Foreign Key 
Is a fied in database table that is a Primary key in another table
Foreign key is used to generate the relationship between the tables
Can accept null and deplicate values

What is Relational Database and Relational Database Management System(RDBMS)

What is Relational Database
is a type of database which is based on the relational model of data
stores and provides access to data points that are related to one another

What is a Relational Database Management System(RDBMS)
Its a program that allows you to create, update and administer a relational database
Most relational database management systems use the SQL language to access the database

Advantages of RDBMS
Enhanced data security
Retain data consistency
Better flexibility and scalability
Easy maintenance

What is a Transaction and what are ACID properties?
What is a transaction 
its a single logical unit of work which accesses and possibly modifies the contents of a database.
A transaction groups SQL statements so that they are either all committed, which means they are applied to the database, or all rolled back which means they are undone from the database
---collection of taskes that need to be completed on a database

ACID Properties 
ACID is a concept (and an acronym) thatrefers to the 4 properties of a transaction in a database system, which are:ATOMICITY, CONSISTENCY, ISOLATION and DURABILITY
These properties ensure the accuracy and integrity of the database

ATOMOCITY 
a transaction must be an atomic unit of work
that is, either all of its operations are executed or none.
CONSISTENCY
the database must remain in a consistent state after any transaction
ensures that the transaction maintains data integrity constraints, leaving the data consistent.
ISOLATION 
all the transactions will be carried out and executed as if it is the only transaction in the system. no transaction will affect the existence of any other transaction
DURABILITY 
once a transaction is completed and committed, its changes are persisted permanently in the database
for this purpose, the completed transactions are recored on permanent memory device (non-volatile) such as hard drives, so the data will always be avaliblw, even if the DB instance is restarted.

What is Normalization and different forms of normalization

Noramlization is the process of organizing data in a database, in order to reduce data redundancy and improve data integrity.
It is a multi-step process that puts data into tabular form, removing duplicated data from the relation tables.
Normalization works in accordance with a series of so-called normal forms.(1NF,2NF,3NF)

1NF or First Normal form
a relation is a=in 1NF if
-it contains only atomic values, an atomic value is a value that cannot be divided
-There are no repeating groups, a repeating group is a series of fields/attributes that are repeated throughout a datbase table
2NF or 2ND normal form
-it is in 1NF
-all partial key dependencies are removed, (where an attribute in a table depends on only a part of the primary key and not on the whole key)
3NF or 3RD Normal form
a relation is in 3NF if 
-it is in 2NF
-Non-Primary key columns shouldnt depend on the other non-Primary key columns.
-There is no transitive functional dependency